Probiotics Added (#426)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/20.treatments.md

This is particularly important considering ‘stay in place’ guidance has been implemented in many densely populated cities around the world.
This measure is likely to limit people’s exposure to sunlight and thus reduce endogenous synthesis of vitamin D, potentially weakening the immune system and increasing the risk of COVID-19 infection.

##### Probiotics

Probiotics are “live microorganisms that, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host” [@doi:10.1038/nrgastro.2014.66]. 

> As a result of the supposed modest benefits of probiotics against common viral infections and evidence that they can modulate the immune response [@doi:10.4082/kjfm.2013.34.1.2; @doi:10.2174/1381612824666180116163411], it is hypothesised that probiotics may have therapeutic benefits against SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.3389/fpubh.2020.00186].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result of the supposed modest benefits of probiotics against common viral infections and evidence that they can modulate the immune response [@doi:10.4082/kjfm.2013.34.1.2; @doi:10.2174/1381612824666180116163411], it has been hypothesized that probiotics may have therapeutic benefits against SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.3389/fpubh.2020.00186].
```

**Potential Mechanisms.**

> Probiotics and next generation probiotics, which are more akin to pharmacological grade supplements, have been associated with multiple potential beneficials effects for allergies, digestive tract disorders and even metabolic diseases through their anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects [@doi:10.1038/nmicrobiol.2017.57; @doi:10.1093/advances/nmy063]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Probiotics and next-generation probiotics, which are more akin to pharmacological grade supplements, have been associated with multiple potential beneficial effects for allergies, digestive tract disorders, and even metabolic diseases through their anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects [@doi:10.1038/nmicrobiol.2017.57; @doi:10.1093/advances/nmy063]. 
```

However, the mechanisms by which probiotics affect these various conditions are diverse, heterogeneous, and strain specific [@doi:10.1093/advances/nmy063]. 

> Some of the beneficial effects of probiotics include reducing inflammation by promoting the expression of anti-inflammatory mediators, inhibiting toll-like receptors (TLR) 2 and 4, direct competition with pathogens, the synthesis of antimicrobial substances or other metabolites, improving intestinal barrier function, and/or favourably altering the gut microbiota and the brain-gut axis [@doi:10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2019.05.010; @doi:10.1093/advances/nmy063; @doi:10.1159/000342079]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some of the beneficial effects of probiotics include reducing inflammation by promoting the expression of anti-inflammatory mediators, inhibiting toll-like receptors (TLR) 2 and 4, direct competition with pathogens, the synthesis of antimicrobial substances or other metabolites, improving intestinal barrier function, and/or favorably altering the gut microbiota and the brain-gut axis [@doi:10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2019.05.010; @doi:10.1093/advances/nmy063; @doi:10.1159/000342079]. 
```
I am probably the worst American to have catching non-American English spellings because I went to school in England, but here goes!

Author: Apologies, my brain hasn't got used to the differences yet and in my stubbornness I refuse to change how I write the date and I will never understand Fahrenheit!

However, there is also a bi-directional relationship between the lungs and gut microbiota known as the gut-lung axis [@doi:10.1038/mi.2011.55], whereby gut microbial metabolites and endotoxins may affect the lungs via the circulatory system and the lung microbiota in return may affect the gut [@doi:10.1111/cmi.12966]. 
Therefore, the gut-lung axis may play role in our future understanding of COVID-19 pathogenesis and become a target for probiotic treatments [@doi:10.1016/j.virusres.2020.198018].

**Current Evidence.**

> Probiotics have been associated with the reduction of risk and duration of viral upper respiratory tract infections [@doi:10.1007/s10096-014-2086-y; 10.1002/14651858.CD006895.pub3; 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2008.11.005]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Probiotics have been associated with the reduction of risk and duration of viral upper respiratory tract infections [@doi:10.1007/s10096-014-2086-y; @doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006895.pub3; @doi:10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2008.11.005]. 
```

> Meta-analyses have assessed the efficacy of probiotics in viral respiratory infections and reported moderate reductions in the incidence and duration of infection [@doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006895.pub3; @doi:10.1017/S0007114514000075]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Meta-analyses that have assessed the efficacy of probiotics in viral respiratory infections have reported moderate reductions in the incidence and duration of infection [@doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006895.pub3; @doi:10.1017/S0007114514000075]. 
```

> Indeed, randomized controlled trials have shown that administering Bacillus subtilis and Enterococcus faecalis [@doi:10.1007/s00134-016-4303-x] or Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG [@doi:10.1164/rccm.200912-1853OC] or Lactobacillus casei and Bifidobacterium breve [@doi:10.1186/s13054-018-2167-x] via the nasogastric tube to ventilated patients reduced the occurrence of ventilator-associated pneumonia in comparison to the respective control groups in studies of viral infections and sepsis. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indeed, randomized controlled trials have shown that administering _Bacillus subtilis_ and _Enterococcus faecalis_ [@doi:10.1007/s00134-016-4303-x], _Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG_ [@doi:10.1164/rccm.200912-1853OC], or _Lactobacillus casei_ and _Bifidobacterium breve_ [@doi:10.1186/s13054-018-2167-x] via the nasogastric tube to ventilated patients reduced the occurrence of ventilator-associated pneumonia in comparison to the respective control groups in studies of viral infections and sepsis. 
```
Manubot will add italics to text formatted `_like this_` :)
The "and" + "or" conjunctions are a little tricky in this sentence, but I think the citations will help readers follow along!

Author: Thanks, good to know. Yes it was a tricky sentence to put together properly.

> These findings are supported by a recently published meta-analysis [@doi:10.4187/respcare.07097] and are particularly pertinent as there is a significant risk of ventilator-associated pneumonia in COVID-19 patients [@doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.12340496], which can be a challenge for clinicians to diagnose due to the fact that severe COVID-19 infection present with the symptoms of pneumonia [@doi:10.1186/s13054-020-03013-2]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These findings are supported by a recently published meta-analysis [@doi:10.4187/respcare.07097].
There is a significant risk of ventilator-associated pneumonia in COVID-19 patients [@doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.12340496], but it can be challenging for clinicians to diagnose this infection due to the fact that severe COVID-19 infection present with the symptoms of pneumonia [@doi:10.1186/s13054-020-03013-2].
```
Just tried to simplify this text a little

Therefore, an effective prophylactic therapy for ventilator-associated pneumonia in severe COVID-19 patients would be of significant therapeutic value.

> Probiotics are generally synonymous with the treatment of gastrointestinal issues due to their supposed anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects [@doi:10.1016/S2352-4642(19)30182-8]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Probiotics are generally synonymous with the treatment of gastrointestinal issues due to their supposed anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects [@doi:10/d2qp]. 
```

Author: I have the same query about the doi for this one. Will it cite the paper properly? @rando2

Reviewer: @RLordan Yes it will! The Lancet (and maybe other journals, but for us it's almost always them!) use () in their DOIs but that doesn't work with manubot. If you go to shortdoi.org, you can type in the Lancet doi and it will give you an alias that doesn't have any parentheses. Then if you go to doi.org/10/d2qp it will bring you to the article.

> Notably, gastrointestinal symptoms commonly occur in COVID-19 patients [@doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2020.03.020] and the ACE2 receptor is highly expressed in enterocytes of the ileum and colon indicating that the these organs may be a potential route of infection [@doi: 10.1101/2020.01.30.927806; @doi:10.1038/cr.2016.152]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notably, gastrointestinal symptoms commonly occur in COVID-19 patients [@doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2020.03.020], and the ACE2 receptor is highly expressed in enterocytes of the ileum and colon, suggesting that these organs may be a potential route of infection [@doi:10.1101/2020.01.30.927806; @doi:10.1038/cr.2016.152]. 
```

> Indeed, SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA has been detected in human faeces  [@doi:10.1016/S2468-1253(20)30083-2] and faecal-oral transmission of the virus has not yet been ruled out [@doi:10.1016/S2468-1253(20)30048-0]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indeed, SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA has been detected in human feces [@doi:10/ggq8zp] and fecal-oral transmission of the virus has not yet been ruled out [@doi:10/ggpx7s]. 
```

> Rectal swabs of some SARS-CoV-2 positive paediatric patients persistently tested positive for several days despite their nasopharyngeal sample testing negative indicating the potential for faecal viral shedding [@doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0817-4].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rectal swabs of some SARS-CoV-2 positive pediatric patients persistently tested positive for several days despite negative nasopharyngeal tests, indicating the potential for fecal viral shedding [@doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0817-4].
```

However, there is conflicting evidence for the therapeutic value of various probiotics against the incidence or severity of gastrointestinal symptoms in viral or bacterial infections such as gastroenteritis [@doi:10.1007/s00203-017-1400-3; @doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1802597]. 

> Nevertheless, it has been proposed that the administration of probiotics to COVID-19 patients and healthcare workers may prevent or ameliorate the gastrointestinal symptoms of COVID-19 for which several clinical trials are now preparing to investigate [@clinicaltrials:NCT04420676; @clinicaltrials:NCT04390477; @clinicaltrials:NCT04366180]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nevertheless, it has been proposed that the administration of probiotics to COVID-19 patients and healthcare workers may prevent or ameliorate the gastrointestinal symptoms of COVID-19, a hypothesis that several clinical trials are now preparing to investigate [@clinicaltrials:NCT04420676; @clinicaltrials:NCT04390477; @clinicaltrials:NCT04366180]. 
```

**Summary.**

> Generally, the efficacy of probiotic use is a controversial topic among scientists. In Europe, EFSA has banned the term probiotics on products labels, which has elicited either criticism for EFSA or support for probiotics among researchers in the field [@doi:10.1016/j.bpg.2015.12.001; @doi:10.1017/S000711451100287X; @doi:10.1038/nrgastro.2014.66]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generally, the efficacy of probiotic use is a controversial topic among scientists.
In Europe, EFSA has banned the term probiotics on products labels, which has elicited either criticism for EFSA or support for probiotics from researchers in the field [@doi:10.1016/j.bpg.2015.12.001; @doi:10.1017/S000711451100287X; @doi:10.1038/nrgastro.2014.66]. 
```

This is due to the hyperbolical claims placed on the labels of various probiotic products, which lack rigorous scientific data to support their efficacy. 

> Overall, the data supporting probiotics in the treatment or prevention of many different disorders and diseases is not conclusive as the quality of the evidence is generally considered low [@doi:10.1007/s10096-014-2086-y]. However, in the case of probiotics and respiratory infections, the evidence seems to be supportive of their potential therapeutic value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overall, the data supporting probiotics in the treatment or prevention of many different disorders and diseases is not conclusive as the quality of the evidence is generally considered low [@doi:10.1007/s10096-014-2086-y]
However, in the case of probiotics and respiratory infections, the evidence seems to be supportive of their potential therapeutic value.
```

Consequently, several investigations are underway to investigate the prophylactic and therapeutic potential of probiotics for COVID-19.

> However, blind use of conventional probiotics for COVID-19 is cautioned against until the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 is further established [@doi:10.1016/S2468-1253(20)30122-9].  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, blind use of conventional probiotics for COVID-19 is cautioned against until the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 is further established [@doi:10/d2qq]. 
```

Author: Hey @rando2 the suggested doi does not link to the article, does that matter?

Reviewer: > Hey @rando2 the suggested doi does not link to the article, does that matter?

Hmm it's working for me, does this link work? <https://doi.org/10/d2qq>

Author: > > Hey @rando2 the suggested doi does not link to the article, does that matter?
> 
> Hmm it's working for me, does this link work for you? https://doi.org/10/d2qq

Ah, spot on, thank you. Good to know more about manubot :)

However, there is conflicting evidence for the therapeutic value of various probiotics against the incidence or severity of gastrointestinal symptoms in viral or bacterial infections such as gastroenteritis [@doi:10.1007/s00203-017-1400-3; @doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1802597]. 
Nevertheless, it has been proposed that the administration of probiotics to COVID-19 patients and healthcare workers may prevent or ameliorate the gastrointestinal symptoms of COVID-19, a hypothesis that several clinical trials are now preparing to investigate [@clinicaltrials:NCT04420676; @clinicaltrials:NCT04390477; @clinicaltrials:NCT04366180]. 

**Summary.**
Generally, the efficacy of probiotic use is a controversial topic among scientists.
In Europe, EFSA has banned the term probiotics on products labels, which has elicited either criticism for EFSA or support for probiotics from researchers in the field [@doi:10.1016/j.bpg.2015.12.001; @doi:10.1017/S000711451100287X; @doi:10.1038/nrgastro.2014.66]. 

> This is due to the hyperbolical claims placed on the labels of various probiotic products, which lack rigorous scientific data to support their efficacy. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is due to the hyperbolic claims placed on the labels of various probiotic products, which lack rigorous scientific data to support their efficacy. 
```
[Apparently hyperbolical isn't wrong but is just not often used?](https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/238906/hyperbolic-vs-hyperbolical) TIL!

Author: now that I read it back it seems aloof haha

**Current Evidence.**
Probiotics have been associated with the reduction of risk and duration of viral upper respiratory tract infections [@doi:10.1007/s10096-014-2086-y; @doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006895.pub3; @doi:10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2008.11.005]. 
Meta-analyses that have assessed the efficacy of probiotics in viral respiratory infections have reported moderate reductions in the incidence and duration of infection [@doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006895.pub3; @doi:10.1017/S0007114514000075]. 
Indeed, randomized controlled trials have shown that administering _Bacillus subtilis_ and _Enterococcus faecalis_ [@doi:10.1007/s00134-016-4303-x], _Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG_ [@doi:10.1164/rccm.200912-1853OC], or _Lactobacillus casei_ and _Bifidobacterium breve_ [@doi:10.1186/s13054-018-2167-x] via the nasogastric tube to ventilated patients reduced the occurrence of ventilator-associated pneumonia in comparison to the respective control groups in studies of viral infections and sepsis. 
These findings are supported by a recently published meta-analysis [@doi:10.4187/respcare.07097].

> There is a significant risk of ventilator-associated pneumonia in COVID-19 patients [@doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.12340496], but it can be challenging for clinicians to diagnose this infection due to the fact that severe COVID-19 infection present with the symptoms of pneumonia [@doi:10.1186/s13054-020-03013-2].

Reviewer 2: although I extrapolated/guessed that you maybe meant ventilator-associated bacterial pneumonia I wasn't completely sure what you meant until I checked the reference; maybe add "bacterial" into "ventilator-associated pneumonia" --> "ventilator-associated bacterial pneumonia" so that it's a bit easier to tell that there are different uses for the term pneumonia here (and in general).

Author: Good catch, thank you @yemarshall

This is particularly important considering ‘stay in place’ guidance has been implemented in many densely populated cities around the world.
This measure is likely to limit people’s exposure to sunlight and thus reduce endogenous synthesis of vitamin D, potentially weakening the immune system and increasing the risk of COVID-19 infection.

##### Probiotics

Probiotics are “live microorganisms that, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host” [@doi:10.1038/nrgastro.2014.66]. 

> As a result of the supposed modest benefits of probiotics against common viral infections and evidence that they can modulate the immune response [@doi:10.4082/kjfm.2013.34.1.2; @doi:10.2174/1381612824666180116163411], it has been hypothesized that probiotics may have therapeutic benefits against SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.3389/fpubh.2020.00186].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result of the potential modest benefits of probiotics against common viral infections and evidence that they can modulate the immune response [@doi:10.4082/kjfm.2013.34.1.2; @doi:10.2174/1381612824666180116163411], it has been hypothesized that probiotics may have therapeutic benefits against SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.3389/fpubh.2020.00186].
```

Both of the studies seem quite hedge-y to me, perhaps make this a little more cautious?

Author: See below :)

> As a result of the supposed modest benefits of probiotics against common viral infections and evidence that they can modulate the immune response [@doi:10.4082/kjfm.2013.34.1.2; @doi:10.2174/1381612824666180116163411], it has been hypothesized that probiotics may have therapeutic benefits against SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.3389/fpubh.2020.00186].

Author: ```suggestion
Some studies suggest modest benefits of probiotics against common viral infections and there is evidence to suggest that they can modulate the immune response [@doi:10.4082/kjfm.2013.34.1.2; @doi:10.2174/1381612824666180116163411], as a result it has been hypothesized that probiotics may have therapeutic benefits against SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.3389/fpubh.2020.00186].
```

Author: @rando better? They are rocky studies, but they are the ones being touted as potential evidence of their effects by pro-probiotic scientists :/ happy to have a closer look. It was a tough one to phrase properly.

**Potential Mechanisms.**

> Probiotics and next-generation probiotics, which are more akin to pharmacological grade supplements, have been associated with multiple potential beneficial effects for allergies, digestive tract disorders, and even metabolic diseases through their anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects [@doi:10.1038/nmicrobiol.2017.57; @doi:10.1093/advances/nmy063]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Probiotics and next-generation probiotics, which are more akin to pharmacological-grade supplements, have been associated with multiple potential beneficial effects for allergies, digestive tract disorders, and even metabolic diseases through their anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects [@doi:10.1038/nmicrobiol.2017.57; @doi:10.1093/advances/nmy063]. 
```

> However, the mechanisms by which probiotics affect these various conditions are diverse, heterogeneous, and strain specific [@doi:10.1093/advances/nmy063]. 

Reviewer: I think it might be better to rephrase the last bit ("diverse, heterogeneous, and strain specific") since it's exactly their words, and just explain how it connects with the text! For example, maybe something like:
```suggestion
However, the mechanisms by which probiotics affect these various conditions would likely differ among strains, with the ultimate effect of the probiotic depending on the heterogenous set of bacteria present [@doi:10.1093/advances/nmy063]. 
```

(This actually may not be what they mean by diverse or heterogeneous? so please take my interpretation with a big grain of salt!)

Some of the beneficial effects of probiotics include reducing inflammation by promoting the expression of anti-inflammatory mediators, inhibiting toll-like receptors (TLR) 2 and 4, direct competition with pathogens, the synthesis of antimicrobial substances or other metabolites, improving intestinal barrier function, and/or favorably altering the gut microbiota and the brain-gut axis [@doi:10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2019.05.010; @doi:10.1093/advances/nmy063; @doi:10.1159/000342079]. 
However, there is also a bi-directional relationship between the lungs and gut microbiota known as the gut-lung axis [@doi:10.1038/mi.2011.55], whereby gut microbial metabolites and endotoxins may affect the lungs via the circulatory system and the lung microbiota in return may affect the gut [@doi:10.1111/cmi.12966]. 
Therefore, the gut-lung axis may play role in our future understanding of COVID-19 pathogenesis and become a target for probiotic treatments [@doi:10.1016/j.virusres.2020.198018].

**Current Evidence.**

> Probiotics have been associated with the reduction of risk and duration of viral upper respiratory tract infections [@doi:10.1007/s10096-014-2086-y; @doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006895.pub3; @doi:10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2008.11.005]. 

Reviewer: The first study seems a little more conservative in its conclusions than the other two, to my read -- like "may be associated" might be more in line with their conclusions! I'm not sure the best way to handle that.

> Probiotics have been associated with the reduction of risk and duration of viral upper respiratory tract infections [@doi:10.1007/s10096-014-2086-y; @doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006895.pub3; @doi:10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2008.11.005]. 

Author: ```suggestion
Probiotics have tentatively been associated with the reduction of risk and duration of viral upper respiratory tract infections [@doi:10.1007/s10096-014-2086-y; @doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006895.pub3; @doi:10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2008.11.005]. 
```

Author: As I write that word I'm not sure of it already! :D

Author: @rando2 you can check my self commits, feel free to reverse if the changes are not quite what you meant

> Meta-analyses that have assessed the efficacy of probiotics in viral respiratory infections have reported moderate reductions in the incidence and duration of infection [@doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006895.pub3; @doi:10.1017/S0007114514000075]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some meta-analyses that have assessed the efficacy of probiotics in viral respiratory infections have reported moderate reductions in the incidence and duration of infection [@doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006895.pub3; @doi:10.1017/S0007114514000075]. 
```
Suggested because it looks like [@doi:10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2008.11.005] evaluated but didn't find a change in incidence

> Indeed, randomized controlled trials have shown that administering _Bacillus subtilis_ and _Enterococcus faecalis_ [@doi:10.1007/s00134-016-4303-x], _Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG_ [@doi:10.1164/rccm.200912-1853OC], or _Lactobacillus casei_ and _Bifidobacterium breve_ [@doi:10.1186/s13054-018-2167-x] via the nasogastric tube to ventilated patients reduced the occurrence of ventilator-associated pneumonia in comparison to the respective control groups in studies of viral infections and sepsis. 

Reviewer: For the last one, I just wanted to mention that they also administered galactooligosaccharides -- I don't think it's totally critical to mention this, but my naive searching suggested that they are thought to promote gut health?

Author: They do as a prebiotic I believe. This is correct, good addition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indeed, randomized controlled trials have shown that administering _Bacillus subtilis_ and _Enterococcus faecalis_ [@doi:10.1007/s00134-016-4303-x], _Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG_ [@doi:10.1164/rccm.200912-1853OC], or _Lactobacillus casei_ and _Bifidobacterium breve_ with galactooligosaccharides [@doi:10.1186/s13054-018-2167-x] via the nasogastric tube to ventilated patients reduced the occurrence of ventilator-associated pneumonia in comparison to the respective control groups in studies of viral infections and sepsis. 
```

Probiotics are generally synonymous with the treatment of gastrointestinal issues due to their supposed anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects [@doi:10/d2qp]. 
Notably, gastrointestinal symptoms commonly occur in COVID-19 patients [@doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2020.03.020], and the ACE2 receptor is highly expressed in enterocytes of the ileum and colon, suggesting that these organs may be a potential route of infection [@doi:10.1101/2020.01.30.927806; @doi:10.1038/cr.2016.152]. 
Indeed, SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA has been detected in human feces [@doi:10/ggq8zp] and fecal-oral transmission of the virus has not yet been ruled out [@doi:10/ggpx7s]. 
Rectal swabs of some SARS-CoV-2 positive pediatric patients persistently tested positive for several days despite negative nasopharyngeal tests, indicating the potential for fecal viral shedding [@doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0817-4].
However, there is conflicting evidence for the therapeutic value of various probiotics against the incidence or severity of gastrointestinal symptoms in viral or bacterial infections such as gastroenteritis [@doi:10.1007/s00203-017-1400-3; @doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1802597]. 

> Nevertheless, it has been proposed that the administration of probiotics to COVID-19 patients and healthcare workers may prevent or ameliorate the gastrointestinal symptoms of COVID-19, a hypothesis that several clinical trials are now preparing to investigate [@clinicaltrials:NCT04420676; @clinicaltrials:NCT04390477; @clinicaltrials:NCT04366180]. 

Reviewer: So looking at NCT04390477, it seems like their analysis is focused on the effect of probiotics on mortality/ time to discharge/ viral clearance. NCT04366180 does seem to evaluate GI symptoms but the primary outcome is SARS-CoV-2 infection. I think it might make sense to rephrase this sentence to be a little less specific about what outcome is being measured.

Author: ```suggestion
Nevertheless, it has been proposed that the administration of probiotics to COVID-19 patients and healthcare workers may prevent or ameliorate the gastrointestinal symptoms of COVID-19, a hypothesis that several clinical trials are now preparing to investigate [@clinicaltrials:NCT04420676; @clinicaltrials:NCT04366180]. Whereas other studies are investigating whether probiotics may affect patient outcomes following SARS-CoV-2 infection [@clinicaltrials:NCT04390477]
```

Author: Does this split that up properly? @rando2

Reviewer: Looks good to me!

**Summary.**
Generally, the efficacy of probiotic use is a controversial topic among scientists.
In Europe, EFSA has banned the term probiotics on products labels, which has elicited either criticism for EFSA or support for probiotics from researchers in the field [@doi:10.1016/j.bpg.2015.12.001; @doi:10.1017/S000711451100287X; @doi:10.1038/nrgastro.2014.66]. 
This is due to the hyperbolic claims placed on the labels of various probiotic products, which lack rigorous scientific data to support their efficacy. 

> Overall, the data supporting probiotics in the treatment or prevention of many different disorders and diseases is not conclusive as the quality of the evidence is generally considered low [@doi:10.1007/s10096-014-2086-y]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overall, the data supporting probiotics in the treatment or prevention of many different disorders and diseases is not conclusive as the quality of the evidence is generally considered low [@doi:10.1007/s10096-014-2086-y].
```

However, in the case of probiotics and respiratory infections, the evidence seems to be supportive of their potential therapeutic value.
Consequently, several investigations are underway to investigate the prophylactic and therapeutic potential of probiotics for COVID-19.
However, blind use of conventional probiotics for COVID-19 is cautioned against until the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 is further established [@doi:10/d2qq]. 

> Until clinical trials investigating the prophylactic and therapeutic potential of probiotics for COVID-19 are complete it is not possible to provide an evidence-based recommendation for their use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Until clinical trials investigating the prophylactic and therapeutic potential of probiotics for COVID-19 are complete, it is not possible to provide an evidence-based recommendation for their use.
```

This is particularly important considering ‘stay in place’ guidance has been implemented in many densely populated cities around the world.
This measure is likely to limit people’s exposure to sunlight and thus reduce endogenous synthesis of vitamin D, potentially weakening the immune system and increasing the risk of COVID-19 infection.

##### Probiotics

Probiotics are “live microorganisms that, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host” [@doi:10.1038/nrgastro.2014.66]. 

> Some studies suggest that probiotics are beneficial against common viral infections and there is mosdest evidence to suggest that they can modulate the immune response [@doi:10.4082/kjfm.2013.34.1.2; @doi:10.2174/1381612824666180116163411], as a result it has been hypothesized that probiotics may have therapeutic value worthy of investigation against SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.3389/fpubh.2020.00186].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some studies suggest that probiotics are beneficial against common viral infections and there is modest evidence to suggest that they can modulate the immune response [@doi:10.4082/kjfm.2013.34.1.2; @doi:10.2174/1381612824666180116163411], as a result it has been hypothesized that probiotics may have therapeutic value worthy of investigation against SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.3389/fpubh.2020.00186].
```

**Potential Mechanisms.**
Probiotics and next-generation probiotics, which are more akin to pharmacological-grade supplements, have been associated with multiple potential beneficial effects for allergies, digestive tract disorders, and even metabolic diseases through their anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects [@doi:10.1038/nmicrobiol.2017.57; @doi:10.1093/advances/nmy063]. 

> However, the mechanisms by which probiotics affect these various conditions would likely differ among strains, with the ultimate effect of the probiotic depending on the heterogenous set of bacteria present [@doi:10.1093/advances/nmy063]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the mechanisms by which probiotics affect these various conditions would likely differ among strains, with the ultimate effect of the probiotic depending on the heterogeneous set of bacteria present [@doi:10.1093/advances/nmy063]. 
```
